---
layout: post
title: Improving on twitter part 1 - Rails MVC refresher
date: 2021-02-08
---

Going from a learning environment, like a bootcamp, to working in industry is very disorientating. You go from learning about very general principles of development to working on very specific bits of code, probably well established pieces of code. The problem with this is that, if you’re not careful, you can forget the fundamentals of development and become complacent developing very specific features based on established standards and precedent. This is certainly what has happened to me, I think it must happen to most developers to some degree. Nonetheless, I became increasingly aware that I hadn’t really had to think about the design of a project since my early days of learning. I wanted to work on a project outside of my normal work to allow me to do this. 

Along with another developer I decided to revisit a challenge I first come across during the bootcamp. The design brief was to create a primitive form of twitter. The user requirements were not complex, there needed to be a way to post a message onto a dashboard and have this message related to a user. The first time I approached this challenge I recollect writing the entire thing in a single ruby file. It was very clunky and violated pretty much all the principles of writing good code. With this in mind, I thought having another go would be a great test to see how far I had come.

I decided to do it on rails as I wanted to refresh my knowledge of how ORM databases are set up as well as the MVC model. 

MVC is a pattern for the architecture of a software application. It separates an application into the following components:

* Models for handling data and business logic
* Controllers for handling the user interface and application
* Views for handling graphical user interface objects and presentation

This separation results in user requests being processed as follows:

* The browser (on the client) sends a request for a page to the controller on the server.
* The controller retrieves the data it needs from the model in order to respond to the request.
* The controller gives the retrieved data to the view.
* The view is rendered and sent back to the client for the browser to display.

Separating a software application into these three distinct components is a good idea for a number of reasons, including:

* improved scalability (the ability for an application to grow)–for example, if your application begins experiencing performance issues because database access is slow, you can upgrade the hardware running the database without other components being affected
* ease of maintenance—as the components have a low dependency on each other, making changes to one (to fix bugs or change functionality) does not affect another
* reusability—a model may be reused by multiple views
