---
layout: post
title: The GDS Prime Directive
date: 2021-03-22
---

One of my favourite things about working as a developer is the emphasis put on wellbeing. When I made the decision to change career this was not something that had really factored into my decision. I was pleasantly surprised then, when I turned up to my first bootcamp and saw the daily meditation and yoga sessions on offer. Prior to this I had worked in a traditional workplace where such things would be dismissed as ‘new age hokiness’ and I was taken aback by the prospect of my employer caring about my mental health. 

At GDS there is a culture of support where I feel everyone is looking out for each other. This is best epitomised by the ‘GDS Prime directive’, something we are reminded of in every retrospective, in which it is declared;

Regardless of what we discover, we must understand and truly believe that everyone did the best job he or she could, given what was known at the time, his or her skills and abilities, the resources available, and the situation at hand.

I’ve since learnt it wasn’t actually GDS who came up with this, it was Norman Kerth, but the sentiment stands!

What this means in practice is that I never feel intimidated or scared at work. Embracing a no-blame doesn’t mean there is no accountability, it's accepting that we are all human and make mistakes. 

Recently my team had to deal with an incident in which GOV.UK had been put under incredible strain. The team had increased server capacity ahead of a big government announcement but could not anticipate the amount of traffic we would actually receive. I’m not sure if it was a record for the number of requests GOV.UK has had to handle per second, but it was certainly the most I've seen in my time on the programme and judging from the reactions of the senior developers I’m guessing that was true for them as well. 

At one point we had to take a page down and divert traffic away from it, this was highly demoralising, not only because we felt that we hadn’t done our jobs properly but also because it was widely reported on by media outlets such as the BBC and on social media. 

In the wake of this incident we went through what had happened maturely, and constructively. There was no blame or talk of personnel repercussions, instead we focused on lessons learnt and thought on how we could improve in future. Everyone on the team was told to take time away to decompress and let go of the anxiety brought about by this event. 

As a mental health champion I couldn’t be prouder of how we handled this and I hope that this will be the standard for the rest of my working life. 
