---
layout: post
title: Why is TDD so hard to do in practice?
date: 2021-03-08
---

In a previous entry I wrote about the virtues of TDD and my desire to do more of it, inevitably I've found it difficult to abide by this vow in practice. I wanted to do a bit more of a deep dive as to why this was, and explore some of the barriers that prevent me from doing it more in my day to day work.

**I have no idea what I’m doing**

At the moment my style is much more trial and error than i’d care to admit,  I’ve alluded to this in previous posts. I’ve found the most effective means of learning for me is to take a hammer to whatever I'm working on and trying to figure out how it actually works rather than doing a lot of upfront reading. The issue with TDD then is that it assumes you know what to test from the start and how to write that test, and often I have no idea! 

The way around this is to seek clarification on what the new feature actually needs to do, this means bombarding the senior devs on my team with questions, which I know I'm entitled to do but still feels awkward. 

**This test isn’t telling me anything**

The whole point of TDD is that the tests should drive development decisions, but what if the test output is so vague that it ends up obfuscating what is actually happening. When this happens it can feel like I spend more time trying to decode the tests than developing the feature. 

The solution to this would seemingly be to only test one variable at a time, to test things on such a granular level that there is no ambiguity as to what is breaking. This can work but being this methodical can takes a lot of time and isn’t always practical in a real world work environment. It is also slightly soul crushing as I see coding as more of an art form than a science. 

**All the setup** 

Sometimes a test will require so much to be stubbed/mocked out that my tests will be 90% setup 10% test. It can be draining to have to do all of this upfront and can lead to the situation in which any minor change to the feature code ripples over to more and more test tweaks.
