---
layout: post
title: Improving on twitter part 2 - TDD, I don’t do it enough
date: 2021-02-15
---

Once I had set up the infrastructure and basic architecture of my twitter clone I had to start writing code. On my first ever day of learning how to code I was taught test driven development(TDD). To have this be the first ever lesson shows the esteem to which this approach was held in by our tutors. You would think then that TDD was as natural to me as breathing and that I use it every day, unfortunately the reality is somewhat different. TDD can be summarised in three simple rules. They are:

* You are not allowed to write any production code unless it is to make a failing unit test pass.
* You are not allowed to write any more of a unit test than is sufficient to fail
* You are not allowed to write any more production code than is sufficient to pass the one failing unit test.

You must begin by writing a unit test for the functionality that you intend to write. But by rule two, you can't write very much of that unit test. As soon as the unit test code fails an assertion, you must stop and write production code. But by rule three you can only write the production code that makes the test pass, and no more.

TDD has never felt natural, it does feel a bit weird to write test code for production code that doesn’t exist but it actually makes a lot of sense. If every piece of code you write is constantly tested then you aren’t suddenly blindsided by a bug in the code and you won’t have to go through hundreds of lines to find the origin of said bug. 

Writing a test for everything also makes for good test coverage and gives us confidence that changes can be made at a later time without being afraid to break the entire application. The tests also act as mini documentation, little coding examples, that describe how the system works and how to use it.

Given all these benefits, it seems odd that TDD feels so rusty to me. I think this is mostly down to working on an established code base, where my changes are often small, incremental and based on established precedent. It also seems as though my fellow developers are somewhat divided in their approach. While all of them value testing, it seems as though a fair number of them prefer to write tests once they have a working product. I think naturally I fall into this camp as I like to mess around with code a bit first and don’t instinctively spend a lot of time thinking up front about how I want to deal with an issue. That said the sensible part of my brain sees the great value in TDD and so for this project I resolved that I would use TDD exclusively. 

